Zelch 128 v2.0a
Copyright (C)1991 Elite Software


3.0  Miscellaneous Utilities

    The ASCII table editor and the copy program are both
available from the boot program ("zelch"), as well as from
the utilities section of the system editor.  It should be
noted that both of these modules have been written to work
online using the "execute a basic program" op-code.


3.1  ASCII Table Editor  ("bbs.ascii edit")

    The purpose of this program is to allow the sysop to
change the translation tables which are used when converting
Commodore PETSCII to standard ASCII and vis-versa.

    After booting this program you will first be prompted to
load a new set of ASCII tables into memory or to use the
ones that are already in memory.  You will then make your
way to the main command bar.  Listed here are several
options along with a line telling you which of the two ASCII
tables you are working with. "Input" table refers to the
table used for ASCII to PETSCII translations, while "Output"
table refers to the PETSCII to ASCII table. The commands
available from here are listed below:

Save - saves the ASCII tables from memory to your boot disk.

Load - loads in a new set of ASCII tables.

Hunt - is used when searching for the character number for a
specific key or alphanumeric character.  You can hit a
lowercase "l" for a straight list of the character set
chosen (for this reason, you may not search for an "l").

Edit - this is the section where you actually change the
ASCII table you are working on.  The display shows you the
translated character number, it's description and the data
for the character it is translated to.  Descriptions with
parenthesis around them refer to unused commodore codes.
Commands available here are:

    Q)uit back to the main command bar
    C)hange the "translated to" code to something else
    J)ump to another code in the current table
    +,-  to scroll through the current table

Change table - allows you to switch between the input and
output tables for editing.

Quit - will return you to BASIC.


3.2  Copy Program  ("bbs.copy")

    This is a two drive copy program that copies all file
types including relative files.  Some of the unique features
of this program include the four copy modes:  Query,
Auto-replace, Complete auto, and Ramload.  Query will prompt
the user for file names, and while copying, will ask you to
verify any replaces if necessary.  Auto-replace will prompt
you for file names, but will automatically replace any
duplicate filenames with the new files.  Complete auto will
prompt the user for a filemask, and will then copy ALL files
on the disk that match the filemask; any duplicate filenames
will be automatically replaced.  Ramload will search through
the source disk directory for a marker (filenames beginning
with "---") and will select all subsequent files until the
next marker is reached.  Ramload is mainly used to copy
system modules and special files during the auto-copy
process when booting your BBS with a ram expander.

    The commands available are:

Copy mode - changes the copy mode which will be used when
the copy files command is executed.

Change source drive - prompts you to change the drive from
which files will be copied.

Change destination drive - prompts you to change the drive
to which files will be copied.

Directory - displays the contents of the source drive.

Copy files - depending on the copy mode, you may or may not
be prompted for files to copy during the file choosing part
of this process.  All selected files will be copied from the
source drive to the destination drive.

Quit - returns you to BASIC.


3.3a  "prg.misc" Utilities

    This module contains independent BBS maintenance
routines. Since the three op-codes represented by this
module have nothing to do with each other, we felt it
necessary to give it a separate section in the docs in order
to better explore the uses of each.


3.3b  Online Menu Editor

Op-code #601

    Much like its counterpart in the offline editor, this
op-code's purpose is for the creating and editing of menus.
Although it's not as fancy or user-friendly as the offline


program, you'll find this op-code very useful when making
minor adjustments or additions to your system.  After
executing, you will be prompted to enter the name of the
menu you wish to create or edit.  The system will then
attempt to load that menu off your "menu drive", starting a
new menu if it isn't found.  From your next prompt, the
following commands are available:

Quit - this command will execute a "return to previous menu"
op-code, thus bringing you back to the menu from whence you
came.  The quit command does not save the menu data to disk,
also note that any "return to previous menu" op-codes on the
previous menu will not work after executing this command.

Save menu - doing basically just what it says, you can use
this command to save the menu onto your "menu drive".  After
saving, you will be returned to the prompt for more editing.
This is useful for making backups during long editing
sessions.

View text - will display the menu text for the menu in
memory.

Edit text - this will bring you straight into the message
maker where you can use the standard editor commands to make
any desired changes to the menu text.  All editor commands
should work normally except:  abort will erase your text
from memory, and save will simply return you to the menu
editor with all changes intact.  The viewable text is
automatically saved along with the menu data when you use
the "save menu" command.

Menu codes - allows you to change the two menu execution
codes.  You will first be prompted to change whether or not
the menu text is displayed automatically.  The second prompt
will ask you to enter the command or op-code subroutine
letter to execute when the menu is loaded.  At the second
prompt you can simply hit RETURN to not use an autocommand,
an uppercase letter to execute a menu command, or a
lowercase letter to use an op-code subroutine. Remember the
autocommand must either be "NONE" or a ONE-LETTER code.

Menu ID code - if you have chosen to use the extended log
feature, this is the three letter menu identifier which
precedes the string of commands accessed within this menu.
You should make this code unique for each menu.

Edit/Add command - this is used to create and change the
commands in your menu. The first prompt will be for the
letter of the command or subroutine you wish you work with,
and the next prompt will determine it's status as a command
or subroutine.  Remember that "commands" may be entered by
the user while "subroutines" are usually accessed by other
commands.  The next prompt will be for the command
description, or the text that is displayed when the command
is executed.  You can hit return to leave the description
unchanged, or you may enter a new description.  You will
then have an opportunity to change or enter the access
levels which may access this command.  Hit return to leave
the access specs unchanged or delete to change them.  Access
levels are changed by entering those levels (A-Z) which you
want changed or toggled from their current status.  After
this you will be shown a chart of the of the op-codes within
the command, a list with each op-code, and the number of
datafields for each op-code.  Notices of datafield errors
should be ignored.  The name that goes with each op-code
number and the meaning of each datafield can be found with
your quick reference sheets.  Remember that in most cases,
datafields asking for subboard letters and such should be in
uppercase while filenames and text datafields are in
lowercase.  Remember, for serious menu work, we recommend
using the offline editor.  At this point you have the
following commands available to you:

    Quit   - saves your changes and brings you back to the
             main menu editor menu.
    Add    - adds a new op-code to the end of the current
             list.  Remember to see your reference sheets
             for op-code numbers.
    Edit   - allows you to change the datafields for one of
             the existing op-codes.
    Insert - prompts you for the position within the op-code
             list you wish to place the new op-code, and
             then performs the "add" command for that
             position.
    Delete - removes from the list the op-code specified.
             You will be prompted for which op-code within
             the list you wish removed.

Edit menu prompts - allows you to re-enter the ASCII and C=
Graphics prompts for the menu in memory.

List commands - will give you a list of the command letters,
the access levels able to use the command, and the
description for that command.

Delete command - removes a command, all of that commands
op-codes, and all the datafields for those op-codes from
memory.


3.3c  Message Base Fixer

Op-Code #602

    If for any reason you encounter errors in message and
reply totals, this utility may be used to recreate the
message base relative file directory.  You will be prompted
for the letter of the message base to fix, and the rest is
automatic.  The program will locate all message belonging to
the subboard in question, and will remove deleted messages
from the relative file records.


3.3d  User Searcher/Changer

Op-Code #603

    This is an extremely useful utility with which you can
make sweeping user data searches and mass user flag/data
changes.  Some of the many uses for this program include:

    o Locating users with duplicate real names.
    o Locating users with duplicate phone numbers.
    o Increasing the credit supply of all users.
    o Creating block and system credit reports.
    o Performing mass join/unjoin sub changes for users.
    o Checking for users with specific access levels/flags.
    o Checking for users with specific computer types.
    o Combinations of any of the above and more.

    After executing you will be given a menu with a list of
all of the user attributes you may affect with this program.
Most of the options listed have search, change, and compare
settings.  "NONE" next to an attribute means that nothing
will be done in connection with that setting.  After
executing the searcher/changer, you will be prompted for the
starting and ending user; then for the printer option.  All
search reports can either be sent to the screen, or to a
printer hooked up as device 4.  Beware that these extensive
functions may take an extremely long time to complete,
depending on your number of users, and the number of
attributes chosen.


4.0a  Booting the BBS

    Once all of the necessary files have been created, you
are ready to boot your BBS for the first time.  It is best
to completely reset the computer and start fresh to ensure
that the memory is clear.  We have not had any problem with
running Zelch in conjunction with special speed up
cartridges, so, unlike most BBS's, you should be able to
leave them plugged in.  Next make sure that you have all of
your drives turned on and renumbered appropriately.

    Run the program titled "zelch" off of your BOOT disk
(which is basically a backup copy of the original program
disk).  The introduction graphics by Sir Lucifer will
entertain you while the necessary machine language files are
loaded.  When the options appear, simply press  1  to boot
the BBS.  If you have an empty Ram Expansion Unit online,
the copy program will boot and auto RamLoading will occur;
otherwise, the BBS will load and begin the setup procedures.


4.0b  Automatic RamLoading

    If you have the RamDos machine language properly
installed as described in section 1.3c, and you selected to
format and reload ram in the boot program, auto RamLoading
will occur.  Auto RamLoading uses the BBS copy program
RamLoad routines.  Files to be copied to ram should be
marked in the directory of the boot disk with dividers. Here
is a sample directory:

    0 "Zelch 128 BBS   " 91 2a     (disk header)
    10  "zelch"            prg     (not copied)
    85  "bbs.main"         prg     (not copied)
    0   "----------------" seq     (divider)
    23  "prg.logon"        prg     (to be copied)
    9   "menu.main"        seq     (to be copied)
    0   "----------------" seq     (divider)
    7   "sys.text"         seq     (not copied)
    0   "----------------" seq     (divider)
    12  "p-xfer 1300"      prg     (to be copied)
    8   "x-xfer 1300"      prg     (to be copied)
    579 blocks free                (end of directory)

    Notice that dividers simply separate the files to be
copied from the rest of the files.  The only requirement for
a divider filename is that it start with three dashes
("---").  We recommend using a directory editor to insert
the dividers and to move files into groups.

    After all of the marked files have been copied to ram
from the boot disk, you will be returned to the boot
program.


4.0c  All That Loading

    Once the main BBS program has been loaded, you will be
initiated into the setup process.  First the system will
create the information windows and then read the system
variables and the definable text strings from the boot disk.
Next you will be prompted to insert all of your system
disks.  After inserting the disks into their appropriate
drives and pressing return, the BBS will read the handles of
all of the users on your system.  This allows for quick and
easy logons since the disk does not have to be accessed when
searching for user accounts.

    The next step in this most wondrous loading procedure is
the reading of your function keys and other system related
data from the "sys.misc data" file.  Lastly the system will
attempt to locate and read the file "sys.one liners".  It
should contain no more than 100 independent one-liners, cute
sayings, bits of trivia, or whatever you feel like using.
One of these lines will be chosen at random before each
prompt.  It will only be displayed when the display code
"\?o$(12)\" is encountered on your system. If this file does
not exist, you may use the "change one-liner" op-code to
define the variable "o$(12)".


4.0d  Entering the Time and Date

    The next prompts that you will encounter will be the
time and date prompts.  The time must be entered in
HOURS:MINUTES format, such as 02:36 for 2:36 (you must
include preceding zeros for single digit hours and minutes).
After pressing return, the BBS will prompt you to press  A
for AM, or  P  for PM.

    Once the time has been successfully entered you will be
prompted for the date.  Use MONTH/DAY/YEAR format, such as
11/07/90  for November 7th, 1990.  When finished entering
the date, the BBS will a chance to verify the information.
Please check the information carefully since a wrong date
could cause users to be deleted or possibly worse!

    The next thing the BBS will do will be to initialize the
modem; this may take a few seconds depending on what kind of
modem you are using.


4.1  Windows, Windows, and More Windows!

    The user status window is the large rectangular grey box
on the upper portion of the screen.  This window contains
some of the necessary information about a user while he or
she is accessing your system.  Between calls, this window
functions as a means of seeing who the last caller was.

    On each side of the user status window is an indicator.
The one to the far left (labeled CHAT) will turn red when a
user pages you (it also blinks if your system is running in
80 columns).  The indicator on the right tells you whether
or not the caller is in some form of color or graphics mode.
The indicator stays grey if the caller is in standard ASCII,
turns purple if the caller is in IBM ANSI, and turns dark
grey (40 cols) or dark cyan (80 cols) if the user is in
Commodore graphics mode.

    On the bottom line of the screen you may see a status
line.  The right portion of the line is reserved for the
filename of the last module loaded.  The rest of the line
may contain any of the following:  logon baud rate/status,
reason for chat page, waiting for call status, comments
during monster mode, or any short message.

    Between calls, there is a BBS statistics/waiting for
call window.  Information displayed here includes: your BBS
name, time and date, calls since boot, number of feedback,
number of logged errors, new users, etc.


4.2a  Waiting for Call

    Unfortunately, until you have a mongo-popular BBS, this
is the section you will become most acquainted with.  While
the system waits patiently for a caller and the above
windows are glaring at you, the functions discussed below
will give you something to do other than twiddling your
thumbs:


4.2b  Screen Blanking

[ALT] - This key will toggle the screen blanking feature.
When activated the screen will turn completely black (saving
your screen from window burn-in, although we can think of
nothing better than having Zelch windows burnt into your
screen), until the BBS receives some kind of activity.


4.2c  Screen Mode Switching

[CONTROL-X] - If you have a 40/80 column switchable monitor
online, this option will let you toggle which screen your
system is running on.


4.2d  That Groovy Calculator

[CONTROL-C] - If you have no real reason for running a BBS,
at least you can rest assured that you have a good place to
do your math homework.

    The calculator functions much like a standard
non-scientific calculator.  Several lines of display have
been added for convenience.  To clear the calculator, press
return 2 or three times, else all totals will carry over to
the next operation.

    HEX and DEC conversion has been added mostly for use by
the programmers.  Enter a value and press  CONTROL-H  to get
its HEX equivalent, or enter a HEX number and press
CONTROL-D  to get its decimal equivalent.  This is only a
conversion routine, you may not work with HEX numbers.

    When you are finished using the calculator, press  ESC
to return to the waiting for call screen.


4.2e  Pull Down Menu

[ESC] - This will cause the pull down menu with the utility
type options to appear.  Use the cursor keys and return to
select the options listed below.

Local logon - this is what a visiting user should use to
logon to the system locally.  After selecting this option,
logon will proceed as it normally does for calling users.
You will also have to use this command the first time that
you logon to the system so that you can go through the new
user logon process.

SysOp logon - using this option will skip all of the logon
procedures and take you directly to the welcome screen that
normally appears after a correct password has been entered.
You will be logged on as ID#1 (usually the sysop).

Zapterm - will load the zapterm module.  The module is
discussed in detail in section 6.

Read feedback - this option will allow you to read and
answer feedback as ID#1 without logging onto the system. It
works exactly like the Read Feedback op-code.

View caller log - will allow you to view and delete the
caller log.  Logs are discussed in detail in section 4.3.

Check error log - will allow you to view and delete the
error log.  Logs are discussed in detail in section 4.3.

New user apps - with this command you can view new user
applications and validate or delete the users.  It works
exactly like the Read new user apps op-code.

Sysop utility menu - this function will log you onto the
system as user ID#1 and will take you directly to the menu
specified in the system variables part of the BBS editor as
the "sysop's menu".  It should be noted that this does not
have to be a menu that is accessible by your system, it can
be a menu designed for use only with this command.


4.3a  Introduction to "the Logs"

    Your system has the ability to keep track of all sorts
of interesting and useful data about its day to day
operations.  Both of the system logs, the caller log, and
the errorlog, will be discussed in detail below.  Remember
that unless regularly deleted, one of these logs can become
quite lengthy and possibly cause disk space problems. Don't
let this happen to you.

4.3b  Extended call log

    The call log is a list of the main daily operations of
your system.  Listed in this file are:  all calls made by
users, monster mode reports, and network linkups.

    An entry for a user's call begins with a reversed info
line with the following information:  Date and time on, time
logged off, baud rate, id number, handle, and real name.  If
the caller is a new user (having access level "A"), the
entry will appear in white, otherwise it will be in cyan.

    If the user's extended log flag is set, the information
described above will be followed by a complete listing of
the user's activities.  Below is a sample extended log
entry.  The first three letters of each line are the
extended log identifiers defined when creating menus.

REP: ID1,ID36       at logon, the user replied to mail
                    received from id numbers 1 and 36.
CMD: S,ID4,E,M      the user executed the commands S, E,
                    and M.  Command  S  was a send mail
                    command, since it's followed by the
                    ID number of the recipient.
MSG: MBA,R,+,MBB,Q  when the message base menu was loaded,
                    message base A was automatically
                    selected. This is shown by "MBA". The
                    caller later pressed  +  and message
                    base B was selected.

    For transfer related entries, you may see things like
"UDB" when U/D base B was selected, and "Download:
filename,p" when a file is transferred.


4.3c  The Errorlog

    Since our program contains no errors, this is mostly to
aid the programmer in the creation and debugging of Zelch
specific modules.  The file contains the following
information about each logged BASIC error:  Time and date it
occurred, the error type and line number, the name of the
last module loaded, the name of the last menu loaded, and
the ID number of the user fortunate enough to encounter the
problem.


4.4a  Monster Mode! (Auto-maintenance)

    Monster Mode is perhaps one of the most ruthless yet
convenient features implemented into any BBS.  Monster Mode
eliminates a lot of the boring and repetitive work of
sysoping.  It automatically deletes inactive users, removes
old news files, and deletes old replies. Monster Mode is
also the means by which mail is carried from one system to
another through networking.

    Monster Mode must be executed daily for the system to
run properly.  The hour at which monster mode is supposed to
execute is set in the system variables part of the offline
editor.


4.4b  Writing a Script

    In order to make Monster Mode as flexible as possible,
we have adopted a script file command set.  The Monster will
only perform the brutal acts listed in the "sys.script"


file.  The script format allows you to customize the way
your maintenance runs, and allows you to easily add
additional maintenance modules for games, etc.  If the
"sys.script" file does not exist, a default script will be
used.  The default commands are:

User 60            (weeds all users who have not called in
                    the last 60 days)
Msg                (enforces the max reply limits of each
                    message base by deleting old responses)
News "sys.news"    (performs news weeding on the main system
                    news file)
Collect 8,0        (will collect/validate drive 8,0)


4.4c  Commands Your Monster Can Understand

    Monster Mode is virtually unlimited in the operations
that it can perform.  Combinations of any of the commands
listed in this section may be used to customize the
activities performed during auto-maintenance.  You can use
any of the sequential file editors included in the BBS to
change your script file.  Also, be sure to look at the
script file "sys.script" that came with the BBS for a good
example of how your script might be laid out.

    The following are all of the commands that your monster
can understand:

User xx - Weed any users that have not called in xx number
of days.  We recommend at least 30 days.

Msg - Will enforce the reply limits specified for each
individual message base by deleting old replies.

Message - see "Msg"

News "filename" u,d - Perform news maintenance on the given
filename device u, drive/LU d.  "sys.news" is the system
newsfile that is automatically read at logon.  If u and d
are not specified for this command, the system will look for
the files on the system data files drive.  Ex: news
"sys.news" 8,0

Collect u,d - Will collect or validate the disk in device u,
drive/LU d.

Validate u,d - see "Collect"

Print "text" - Will display the text inside the quotes on
the screen.

Run "filename" u,d - Will execute a stand alone basic
program that appears on device u, drive/LU d.  Ex:  run
"game maint" 8,0

Execute "filename" u,d - Loads and runs a zelch specific
module off of device u, drive/LU d.  The module MUST end
with  u=d(0,0):d=d(0,1):i$="prg.monster":goto23  to return
to monster mode when the module is done executing.  Ex:
execute "wall.maint" 8,0

DOS "command" u,d - Executes the DOS command inside the
quotes on device u, drive/LU d as if it were sent using
open15,u,15,"command":close15   Ex:  dos "s0:sys.work" 8,0

Disk "command" u,d - see "DOS"

Display "filename" u,d - Reads the sequential file
"filename" on device u, drive/LU d.  Ex:  display
"sys.title" 8,0

File "filename" u,d - see "Display"

Hard "filename" u,d - Works in the same manner as display
except that the output is directed at the printer (as device
4) instead of the screen.  Ex:  hard "sys.userlog" 8,0

Clear xx - Resets the  o(xx)  variable specified.  Ex: clear
0  will reset the number of calls since boot every time
Monster Mode executes.

Reset xx - see "Clear"

Hayes "command" - Sends the data inside the quotes to the
modem in the form of a Hayes command.  It is VERY important
that you do not include "AT" as part of the command.  Ex:
hayes "h1"  will send "ath1" to the modem, taking the phone
off hook.

Modem "command" - see "Hayes"

Network - Checks to see if there is any mail on file for any
of the systems in your network.  If there is, the modem in
initialized, and an attempt is made to call the destination
board.  If the call goes through and the transfer is
successful, the file will be deleted.

Unpack - This command will sort through all of the networked
mail that has been received and places it in the appropriate
files.  Any messages not intended for your board will be
forwarded.  It might be a good idea to unpack before and
after the "Network" command.


4.4d  The Monster Mode Report

    When Monster Mode has done its deeds, it files a light
green report in the caller log.  Contained in this report is
a list of:  all systems successfully networked with, users
weeded, newsfiles weeded, and messages with deleted replies.

    If Monster Mode has nothing hideous to report, it will
respond with "Growl".


4.5a  Logging on to the System

    For those of you interested in the specifics of what
happens when a caller attempts to connect to your system,
here it is:  If you are using a 1650 or 1660 modem, the
system will pick up the phone at the first detection of a
ring, and wait for carrier detect for a few seconds.  If you
are using a Hayes compatible modem, your modem should answer
for itself and send a carrier at its highest baud rate.  It
will then wait for either a "1" for a 300 baud connection,
"5" for 1200 baud, or "10" for 2400 baud.  After receiving
one of these codes, your system will go online. If your
hayes compatible modem is not connecting with the user, it
is probably due to your modem not being properly set. See
your modem manual for information about setting the
initialization commands defined in the system editor.

    As soon as a connection is made, the system will send
out the "connection, hit return" string and wait for the
user to hit RETURN.  Next the system will send out the "hit
your backspace" string and wait for a response.  If a
Commodore delete (chr$(20)) is detected, the system will go
into commodore graphics mode and turn linefeeds off.  Any
other response will put the system into ASCII translation
mode and prompt the caller for linefeeds.  An ASCII caller
will also be asked whether or not they wish to receive ANSI
codes.

    The system will then display an intro screen.  There are
two types of intro screens, one set for Commodore graphics
callers, and another for ANSI/ASCII callers.  You may have
multiple screens of either type.  The number of screens for
each is defined in the system variables section of the
offline editor.  If you have only one of either type, the
filename for the intro screen will be "sys.title" for
Commodore people, and "sys.title/a" for ASCII/ANSI people.
Otherwise, the filenames are "sys.title #" and "sys.title
#/a" respectively, where "#" is random number from 1 to the
number of intro screens for the current emulation mode.  For
example, if the user is in ANSI and there are 5 intro
screens specified for ASCII/ANSI intro screens, and the
system has chosen the random number 3, then the file
displayed will be "sys.title 3/a".

    The next prompt will be for the user to enter either
their user ID number, or their handle.  If an ID number is
entered, the system will check for a valid account and
immediately prompt the caller for their password.  If a
handle is entered, the system will check the list of valid
handles in memory for an exact match.  If one is found, it
will locate the user's account information, and prompt them
for their password.  If for any reason the account


information given is not valid, the user will be asked if
they would like to apply for a new account.

    While the user types in the characters to their
password, the "password mask character" defined in the
system editor will be echoed back to them and to the screen.
If the password is valid, the system will log them in.  If
not, the system will allow them to continue to try to
remember their user information for no longer than two
minutes before throwing them off.

    After a valid password has been entered, the system
loads the user's account information and updates the user
information window.  The system will then display the file
"sys.welcome", and then the "sys.automessage" file if it
exists.  After reading these files, the system opens
"sys.news" and displays any new news files.  If the user is
calling at 300 baud, but their last call information shows a
nonstandard baud rate (300-600), they will be prompted to
change back to that baud.

    With the welcome process completed, the system now reads
in the system's first menu, as defined in the offline
editor, and transfers to user control.


4.5b  Communication Modes

    There are several emulation modes available to make the
system more enjoyable to a large number of computer users.

Commodore Color/Graphics - Nicknamed PETSCII by loving
Commodore owners, this mode is capable of displaying and
receiving 15 colors, cursor movements, screen clearing,
reverse mode, and all of the wondrous keyboard graphics
found on Commodore computers.  For 80 column users, this
also includes underline, and blink mode as well.

ANSI - Capable of viewing the 8 standard colors, cursor
movements, and screen clearing, this emulation mode adds
variety for the ASCII caller.

ASCII - The lucky user using this mode can view all 26
letters of the English alphabet in upper AND lowercase,
Arabic numerals 0-9, mathematical signs, and many cool
punctuation symbols in mono-chromatic greatness.


4.5c  New User Logon

    Upon determining New User status, the system will boot
the new user module and display the file "sys.new msg"
(which usually contains a welcome, list of rules, info,
etc.).  Next the system will check to ensure that there is
an open user account within the max limit set in the offline
editor.  If there are no open accounts, the user will not be
permitted to logon.  If an open account is found, a series
of questions will follow.

    The first question will be for the users handle, or
pseudoname.  The handle will be compared with the others in
memory to ensure that there are no duplicates.

    The next questions will be for the user's full real
name, the user's voice phone number where the first three
characters are the area code, the next three characters are
the dialing prefix, and the last four characters are the
last four digits of the phone number.  An example would be
"6022976902" as input for the Zelch BBS phone number.  If
correct input is received, the system will automatically
format it into "(XXX)/XXX-XXXX" so that it may be more
easily read.

    The next prompt will be for a 1-10 character password.
We recommend that passwords not be related to the user's
handle or the name of the board.  The user will then be
prompted for 40/80 columns and their computer type.

    After answering all of these questions, the user has an
opportunity to edit any incorrect information.  The BBS then
displays the definable text string that should contain the
user's ID number assigned to their account.  They should be
reminded to write their ID number and password down for
future use, and prompted to hit return.

    If the file "sys.new app" is not found on the
appropriate drive, the user will go directly to logon.  If
the file is found, the system will read in the questions one
at a time and prompt the user for a response to each.  Up to
50 questions may be contained in the file, and all will be
free response type questions (where the user may answer
anything).  The file "sys.new app" should contain only
questions, one after another, one line each.  You can use
any of the sequential file editors included with the BBS to
edit/create this file.

    As soon as the questionaire is successfully completed,
and the user verifies the correctness of his/her responses,
the new user application is saved to the "sys.new user" file
for pending validation.


4.5d  Calls, Time, and Idle Time Limits

    User's are not permitted to logon more than the
specified number of times for their access level.  Using the
offline system editor, you as the sysop have the ability to
define the maximum number of calls, the total number of
minutes allowed for each call, and the maximum number of
minutes that a user may sit idle (without pressing a key) at
any part of the system.  To disable the idle timer for a
particular access level, simply set the idle limit to 0.
Call limits range from 1-99 and time limits range from
1-255, there is no way to disable these checks.


5.0  Online SysOp Utilities

    There are several commands available only to the sysop
from the BBS's keyboard.  These keys will not function if
sent across the modem.  Any other keys entered by the sysop,
will be processed as if the user had entered them.


5.1a  Chat Mode

    By hitting the  [ESC]  key located in the upper left
hand corner of your keyboard, you can enter and exit Chat
Mode.  While in Chat Mode, you may directly communicate with
the user.  The user's time remaining will not decrease.  The
only courtesies expected in chat are that one person types
at a time, and two returns should be hit when you are
finished talking.

    When you enter chat, note where the user is in the
system.  It may be a good idea to enter "/v" to review the
user's message after exiting chat if the user was in the
message maker, or  ?  if they were at a prompt.


5.1b  Forced Logoff

    This command can serve either of two purposes. The first
has friendly intentions.  If you press the  [LINEFEED]  key
and hold it down until the waiting for call screen appears,
you can log the caller off without saving their user
information, or logging the call.  This is good if
you wish to spare the caller the hassle of having to change
his/her last call date or if they have a limited number of
calls and they do not want to waste one.

    The second purpose of this key requires that you lightly
tap the  [LINEFEED]  once.  This logs the user off normally
and saves all of their user information.  This is normally
used to throw losers and potential hackers off your system,
so that you may get on and delete them.


5.2a  Pull Down Menu Utilities (User Dissection)

    The most powerful commands available to the sysop while
a caller is online are the pull down menu utilities,
accessed by pressing the [ALT] key while the user is at a
menu prompt.  Simply highlight the options using the cursor
keys and press return to select.  Using these utilities you
can edit most of the user's information, and can perform DOS
operations.  Any user info that is changed here will get
saved when the caller logs off.  The most common use of this
part of the board is for validating new users when they
first logon.  Once at the main menu you can give them
access, set the appropriate flags, and give them more time
for their first call.

    All editing of user data using this program will be done
with the bit editor.  Simply cursor through the displayed
info, and make changes where necessary.  Make sure that you
do not leave extra spaces at the end of any of the data that
you edit, as spaces would be included as part of the change.
Also, it is not necessary to enter things in uppercase,
that will be done for you when you press return.


5.2b  Profile

    The user profile option lets you edit the following user
data:  handle, password, real name, and phone number.
Handle - (16 characters max) - This is the name that the
user goes by on your system.  When editing this information
it should be noted that this module will not check for
duplicates.  Be sure not to enter another user's handle.

Password - (10 characters max) - This is your personal
access code.  Someone MUST have this information to get onto
the system using your account.  It is best to keep this
information private, as many problems result in sharing your
account with other users.  A password should also be
original.  Do not relate it in any way to your handle or the
BBS's name.

Real name - (16 characters max) - Since Zelch allows for the
use of handles or pseudonames, it is necessary to keep
separate information regarding the user's real name.  This
should, if possible, include first and last names in case
you need to reach the user by phone.

Phone number - (14 characters) - This is the user's phone
number (preferably the number at which they can be reached
by voice) written in an easy to read format.


5.2c  Access and Flags

Access level - This is the user's access level from A-Z.
This is used to determine which news files the user has
access to, which commands, which message bases, etc.  A is
reserved for new users, but the other 25 may be defined as
you wish.  Z is usually sysop access, but you could make it
something else.

System access flags - These access flags have no purpose as
far as the "bare-bones" system is concerned.  They are meant
for the purpose of special access commands (ie: adult access
on message bases, expert mode flag, privileged functions,
etc.).  The flags are checked using the related op-codes and
are completely definable.  None of them are reserved or
serve any specific purpose unless defined by you.

To change the system access flags, cursor through the
alphabet and toggle flags that should be turned on to
reverse by pressing space.  Flags are turned off in the same
manner.


5.2d  Time/Credits

Time remaining - This is the amount of time (in minutes)
that the user has left online for this call.  When the
caller runs out of time, he/she will be automatically logged
off (but may call again, call limit permitting).

Calls today - This is the number of calls that the user has
made since midnight.  It is sometimes useful to change this
number to allow a user more calls.

UD Block credits - Block credits are given to a user when
he/she uploads a program.  How many block credits awarded is
determined by the credit ratio for a particular U/D base.  A
user may not download more disk blocks than they have
credits.

System credits - These serve no purpose, much like access
flags.  These credits are earned and spent using op-codes.
By implementing the system credits op-codes, you can award
credits for certain BBS activities (posting, voting, etc.)
and take credits for others (playing games, using special
modules, etc.).


5.2e  DOS Commands

    When you select this command, two small windows appear.
The first window contains the active device, drive/LU data,
and the status of the drive after the last disk operation.
The second window is where the commands are entered.  Simply
type in any BASIC 2.0 DOS commands.  To change the active
device number, enter the device,drive/LU (such as "9,0" to
select device 9, drive/LU 0).  The only other non-standard
command is directory.  Use  $:filemask  to view the
directory on the current drive.  Press RETURN by itself to
exit DOS.


5.2f  Other/Unlisted User Attributes

    There are numerous pieces of data stored in the userfile
that we decided were not important enough to include in the
online user editor.  They are listed and described below.

Last call info - This is the user's last call date in the
form of YYMMDDHHMM.

Info flags - This is a string of numbers and letters that
store some of the information that is vital to the user's
parameters.  Each character in the string defines a
different parameter.  When you edit this string you have to
re-enter all 10 settings.

    E) Extended log value - this is set to whatever the
       extended log default is at the time the user logs
       on as new.  It can, however, be changed.  A "1" in
       this spot turns this function on, while a "0" shuts
       it off.

    8) 40/80 columns - this is set to a "1" if the caller
       calls in 80 columns, and a "0" if they call in 40.

    D) Delete protect - setting this to a "1" will prevent
       the user from being weeded by Monster Mode,
       regardless of their last call date.  A "0" means that
       the user is eligible for weeding.

    S) SysOp flag - if this is set to a "1" the user will
       receive certain sysop privileges, such as being able
       to delete or edit any post/response, being able to
       view anonymous handles, and access to special message
       maker commands (get and put).

    ?) Pause prompts - if this is set to "1", the screen
       will pause after every 24 lines of uninterrupted
       file output.  A "0" turns this feature off.

    X) Transfer protocol - this is the protocol that is
       loaded when the user logs on.  A "0" is used to
       signify Punter, and a "1" means Xmodem.

    #) Line numbers - setting this to a "1" will cause the
       line numbers feature of the message maker to default
       to on.  A "0" is the normal default.

    R) Read mode - this is the manner in which posts are
       read.  A "1" in this spot will put you in continuous
       read mode, stopping only at the end of a message and
       all of its replies.  A "0" will cause the BBS to stop
       after each individual message and reply.

    B) Baud timing - this is the fine tuning adjustment
       required for optimal 2400 baud performance for some
       users.  The bit is usually set for 8, but may be
       changed anywhere from 0 to 9.

    C) Computer type - this setting is used only for
       searches in the searcher/changer op-code.  Other
       than that, it is only for your information.


6.0  Zapterm

    Available from the Waiting for Call menu is the powerful
Zapterm terminal program for use with all modem types.  This
program is used to access bulletin boards and other online
services without taking your system down.


6.1  Initialization

    When loaded, Zapterm sends the hayes commands defined in
the system variables section of the offline editor to your
modem.  Your baud rate is also set to the idle baud rate
setting.  Before displaying the menu, Zapterm also loads the
special terminal function keys, and makes sure Punter is the
loaded transfer protocol.


6.2a  Zapterm Menu

    Before you now is the main terminal menu.  Commands
available are listed in four rows and columns with the
command letter highlighted in white.  Below that is the
active device, drive/LU which is used by disk related
operations, the baud rate, and the active transfer protocol.
Below that is your prompt.


6.2b  Autodialer and Phonebook

    When the autodialer is selected, the phonebook is
automatically displayed.  The most important information
about each system is listed.  Use the cursor keys to move
the arrow up and down the left hand margin to the system of
your choice.  Press RETURN to dial the selected system, or
enter one of the following commands:

[ESC] - Exits the autodialer and takes you back to the main
terminal menu.

L - Loads the last saved phonebook from your system data
files drive.

U - Dial an unlisted phone number.

S - Saves the phonebook with all changes to the appropriate
disk.

E - Edits the highlighted entry.

    To abort dialing, press spacebar at any time.  If you
connect to a system, the [HELP] key will be defined as the
Handle/ID for the system dialed, and the [SHIFT]/[RUN/STOP]
combination will send the password for the system.


6.2c  File Commands

Download file - This command will attempt to receive a file
using the current transfer protocol.

Upload file - Attempts to send a file from the active drive
to the system online using the current transfer protocol.

Filedump - Will send a sequential file character by
character across the modem.

Seq reader - Allows the sysop to view a sequential file.

Message Maker - This allows you to create sequential files
on the active drive.  These files can be sent using
filedump.


6.2d  Terminal Commands

    [ESC]  is used to enter the modem terminal.  Here all
keypresses are sent directly to the modem channel and
incoming data is sent to the screen.  The following keys
have special functions while in terminal mode:

[ESC] - Exits the terminal and takes you back to the menu.

[ALT] - Toggles between ASCII and Commodore Graphics modes.

[LINEFEED] - Toggles whether linefeeds are sent and
received, or ignored altogether.


6.2e  Other Commands

Quit to the BBS - This reloads the BBS function keys and
returns you to the Waiting for Call screen.

Baud change - Allows you to select a new baud rate.  Entries
100-600, 1200, and 2400 are accepted.

Directory - Displays the disk directory on the active drive.

Dos channel - Prompts you for a BASIC 2.0 DOS command to
send to the open drive command channel.

Pickup phone - This is especially useful for 1650, and 1660
users since the autodialer does not work with either of
these modems.  This is used to sent the pickup phone codes
to your modem.

Hangup phone - This is also useful for 1650, 1660 users.

Change drives - Use this command to change the active device
and drive/LU.

Xfer protocols - This toggles between Punter and Xmodem.

Edit fkeys - This will list out the function key definitions
and allow you to re-enter the text.  The  S  key will save
these definitions to your Zapterm file while  L can be used
to reload them.